 
  ANSWER SHEET 
  
BIO SOL Review 12 - Disease - Viruses - Antibiotics 
(12)  
 
1. (2006-28) Which of these could not be a virus?    
a. F  
b. G  
c. H  
d. J  
 
2. (2006-26) Which of the following choices is not a 
method of preventing bacterial illnesses from 
spreading in a meat-processing plant?   
a. Using antibiotics to treat persons with 
food poisoning  
b. Washing hands and utensils with hot 
soapy water  
c. Use of gloves when handling raw meat 
products  
d. Treatment of work areas with chemical 
disinfectants  
 
3. (2003-45) An important difference between viruses 
and living cells is that viruses —   
a. cannot reproduce outside of cells  
b. cannot mutate but cells can  
c. contain more nuclei than cells  
d. need an energy source but cells do not  
 
4. (2003-27) A certain virus causes a disease of the 
digestive system. What is the most likely source of 
this virus?   
a. Soil  
b. Water  
c. Air  
d. Insects  
 
5. (2004-41) Which of these could be successfully 
treated with antibiotics?   
a. Strep throat  
b. Common cold  
c. HIV  
d. Influenza  
 
 
6. (2006-19) The results of Pasteur’s experiment 
helped Pasteur to —   
a. isolate the virus responsible for smallpox  
b. convince people to cover food  
c. reject the theory of spontaneous 
generation  
d. produce a vaccine against rabies  
 
7. (2002-44) People who have been exposed to 
excessive radiation often experience mutations. If 
these mutations only occur in somatic (body) cells, 
these people may —   
a. experience an increased risk of cancer  
b.  experience difficulties replicating RNA  
c.  pass on these mutations to their offspring  
d.  develop entirely new DNA sequences in 
all cells  
 
8. (2002-41) Which characteristic do viruses possess 
in common with living cells?   
a. They contain nucleic acids such as 
DNA or RNA.  
b. They contain a nucleus and organelles.  
c. They make their own food.  
d. They are inactive outside the body of living 
cells.  
 
9. (2002-37) Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Many years ago, 
streptomycin easily controlled the bacterium. Now 
streptomycin is much less effective against the 
resistant M. tuberculosis. The increasing 
resistance of M. tuberculosis to streptomycin is 
most likely due to the increased —   
a. use of streptomycin for bacterial 
infections  
b. numbers of alternatives to streptomycin  
c. artificial production of streptomycin  
d. early detection of bacterial infections  
 
10. (2002-5) Long ago, people thought that the 
smallpox virus could be carried through the air. 
For this reason, many people moved from 
crowded cities to the more open country during 
smallpox epidemics, carrying with them family 
members who had the virus but had not yet 
contracted the disease. When the pox erupted on 
these family members, other members living in the 
home soon contracted the disease too. Which of 
these was then discovered to be the means of 
transmission?   
a. Being bitten by mosquitoes that carry the 
virus  
b. Directly contacting a person with 
smallpox  
c. Drinking water from local wells  
d. Eating food that contains the virus  
 
11. (2003-3) Animals coming from foreign countries 
are kept in quarantine before being allowed into 
the United States. This precaution is taken to help 
prevent —   
a. the escape of foreign animals into local 
natural habitats  
b. the introduction of foreign animal 
diseases  
c. cross-breeding of native animals with the 
foreign ones  
d. predator destruction of the foreign animals  
 
12. (2005-30) Change in species is described as a 
process that usually occurs over long periods of 
time. Yet, even though antibiotics have only been 
widely used for fifty years, scientists recognize that 
overuse of antibiotics has led to antibiotic-resistant 
strains of bacteria. The reason this can occur in a 
relatively short span of time is that —   
a. there are many different types of bacteria  
b. bacteria are very small  
c. travelers carry bacteria around the world  
d. bacteria reproduce rapidly  
 
 
  
 
