 
1
  Name ____________      Date _________    
  
BIO SOL Review 9 - Homeostasis - Water properties (15)  
 
1. (2006-33) Some insects can stand on the surface of 
water because water —  
a. has a high specific heat  
b. is a good evaporative coolant  
c. is cohesive and adhesive  
d. has a high boiling point  
 
2. (2006-47) In the human body, muscle cells have an 
increased need for energy during exercise. To help 
supply this energy, the body will immediately 
increase:   
a. activity in the nervous system to stimulate 
intake of carbon dioxide  
b. the breathing rate to supply more oxygen 
to cells for the release of energy  
c. the need for waste products to be retained  
d. food intake to increase the substances 
available for respiration  
 
3. (2001-43) According to this simplified water cycle, 
the process of transpiration is the process that —  
a. releases water vapor from plants  
b. increases the rate of the water cycle  
c. speeds the evaporation of water  
d. causes photosynthesis in plants  
 
4. (2006-46) Some peeled pieces of apple were placed 
in distilled water and some in very salty water. The 
cells in the apple pieces will —  
a. lose water in both solutions  
b. gain water in the distilled water and lose 
water in the salty water  
c. gain water in both solutions  
d. lose water in the distilled water and gain 
water in the salty water  
 
5. (2003-11) Which of the following molecules is most 
abundant in the cells of the human body?  
a. Nucleotides  
b. Water  
c. Lipids  
d. Amino acids 
 
6. (2006-34) If transpiration stopped completely, how 
would a plant’s homeostasis first be affected?  
a. Water molecules would not be released 
from leaves.  
b. Carbohydrates would no longer be formed.  
c. Fewer sugars stored in roots and stems 
would diffuse into the soil.  
d. More carbon dioxide molecules would be 
taken in by leaves. 
 
7. (2003-4) Unlike other animals, mammals can 
perspire. The main benefit of perspiring is that it —  
a. removes dirt from the surface of the skin  
b. cools the skin with evaporation  
c. relaxes the muscles  
d. removes extra water from the cells  
 
8. (2004-28) The unique properties of water enable life 
to exist on Earth. Which of these is a property of 
pure water?  
a. It dissolves many substances.  
b. Its solid form is more dense than its liquid.  
c. It is slightly more acidic than air.  
d. It has a low heat absorption capacity.  
 
9. (2005-20) Ice floats on a lake. This characteristic of 
water is responsible for —  
a. suffocation of aquatic organisms  
b. mixing a lake’s thermal layers  
c. preventing a lake from freezing solid  
d. altering migration patterns of fish  
 
10. (2002-26) Bacteria are tremendously successful 
unicellular organisms, yet all large organisms are 
multicellular. Unicellular organisms cannot grow very 
large because the — 
a. diffusion of nutrients into the cell’s 
interior would be too slow  
b. locomotion of the organisms would be too 
slow  
c. respiratory rate would be too high  
d. energy expenditures would be too great  
 
11. (2005-36) When there is a lower concentration of 
water outside of a plant cell rather than inside a 
plant cell, the plant will tend to — 
a. grow toward the sun 
b. lose water and wilt  
c. gain water and become rigid 
d. increase its rate of photosynthesis 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 
12. (2002-21) The concentration of glucose must be 
maintained within a fairly narrow range in most 
vertebrates. This statement is an example of —   
a. homeostasis  
b. fermentation  
c. excretion  
d. glycolysis  
 
13. (2001-23) A microorganism which releases water 
into its environment to regulate its salinity during 
osmosis is undergoing a process that is similar to a 
human being who releases moisture on a hot day. 
This process that helps keep both the 
microorganism and the human body fluids in 
balance is known as —  
a. heredity  
b. homeostasis  
c. mutation  
d. cell division  
 
 
14. (2001-38) The above diagram shows the process of 
osmosis. Only the water molecules could enter the 
cell because water molecules —  
a. have more energy than the protein 
molecules  
b. are smaller than the protein molecules  
c. contain more hydrogen atoms than the 
protein molecules  
d. are more numerous than the protein 
molecules  
 
 
 
15. (2002-18) A student was studying the responses of 
cells to solutions of varying salt concentrations. 
Which solution below would cause no change in cell 
size?  
a. F  
b. G  
c. H  
d. J  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
