BIO SOL Review 1 - Research, Scientific Cooperation, 
Microscopes  
  Name __________________      Date _______    
 
1. (2006-30) An important feature of modern 
classification systems is that they —   
a. group organisms that live in the same habitat  
b. apply only to organisms that are alive today  
c. can predict the discovery of new species  
d. can incorporate new scientific discoveries  
 
2. (2004-35) An organism that causes infections in plants 
and animals, but cannot be seen with a light 
microscope similar to that used in a high school 
biology course, is most likely a —   
a. virus  
b. bacterium  
c. protozoan  
d. fungus  
 
3. (2002-50) A student wants to view cells under the 
compound microscope at a total magnification of 
400X. If the eyepiece is 10X, which of the following 
objective lenses should be used?   
a. 10X  
b. 4X  
c. 100X  
d. 40X  
 
 
4. (2003-6) When viewing a prepared slide under the 
compound microscope, a student has to remove his 
glasses. This means he will need to readjust for fine 
focus with which part labeled above?     
1       b. 2         c. 3          d.  4 
 
5. (2004-4) Which of the following methods would  
provide the most accurate information for students 
collecting data about local attitudes concerning the use of 
alternative fuels for automobiles?   
a. Track prices at nearby gas stations  
b. Take an opinion poll of drivers  
c. Study newspaper articles  
d. Listen to speeches given by politicians  
 
6. (2004-38) Richard was observing black swallowtail 
butterflies in the field. Which one of these is an 
observation he made about a black swallowtail 
butterfly?   
a. The black swallowtail belongs to the class 
Insecta.  
b. The black swallowtail laid its eggs on a 
parsley plant.  
c. The black swallowtail likes to fly more than 
anything else.  
d. The black swallowtail is closely related to the 
spicebush swallowtail.  
7. (2003-2) Which of these would be the best resource to 
research the symptoms and treatment of hypoglycemia?   
a. Daily television news  
b. New England Journal of Medicine  
c. Journal of Zoology  
d. Natural History Magazine  
 
8. (2004-27) Which of the following came first in the 
scientific study of living things?   
a. Light microscope  
b. Electron microscope  
c. Cell theory  
d. Model of DNA 
9. (2002-12) If a student needs to do research on heredity 
for a science project, which of these sources is the most 
reliable resource?   
a. A weekly news magazine  
b. A newspaper tabloid  
c. A professional journal  
d. A national newspaper  
 
10. (2003-46) The discovery that chromosomes are involved 
in inheritance was made possible by the invention of the- 
a. mercury thermometer  
b. computer  
c. microgram scale  
d. microscope  
 
 
11. (2002-10) Which of these hypotheses is best supported 
by observations of this animal?   
a. This animal is herbivorous.  
b. This animal has poor hearing.  
c. This animal usually hunts for food at night.  
d. This animal spends much of its time digging.  
 
12. (2001-24) Henry’s project is on porcupine populations in 
Virginia. He would like to use the phone book to help him 
make contacts. His most reliable contacts would 
probably be found by looking in the phone book under —   
a. state agencies  
b. newspapers  
c. travel agencies  
d. civil engineers  
 
13. (2006-40) A student researching a new discovery about 
the activity of mitochondria could find the most current 
and reliable information in a —   
a. scientific journal  
b. newspaper  
c. popular news magazine  
d. cell biology textbook  
14. (2004-25) Which of the following best explains why a 
student researching genetics should use the most 
recent textbooks available?   
a. No technologies from more than ten years ago 
are still in use.  
b. Research in Mendelian genetics began very 
recently.  
c. New discoveries frequently add to older 
knowledge in genetics.  
d. Older textbooks are more difficult to 
understand. 
 
15. (2004-37) Which of the following scientific 
achievements best represents a collaborative effort 
among scientists?   
a. Gregor Mendel’s study of pea plants enabled 
Thomas Morgan to become the first to locate a 
gene on a chromosome in Drosophila.  
b. Anton van Leeuwenhoek invented the 
microscope in the 1600s, which was later used 
by others to study cells.  
c. Robert Koch studied infectious diseases, and 
Louis Pasteur demonstrated that life only 
comes from life.  
d. Francis Crick and James Watson worked 
together to design the double-helix model 
of DNA.  
 
16.  (2002-4) In 1928, the scientist Alexander Fleming was 
trying to grow the bacterium Staphylococcus, and by 
chance, discovered that it would not grow in the 
presence of a mold that he named Penicillium. In 
1939, Ernst Chain and Howard Florey purified 
penicillin, and in 1941, penicillin was first used to treat 
bacterial diseases. In 1945, Alexander Fleming, Ernst 
Chain, and Howard Florey received the Nobel Prize in 
medicine for the discovery and isolation of penicillin. 
These facts show that —   
a. Florey and Chain unfairly used Fleming’s work 
and should not have received the Nobel Prize  
b. whenever possible, the Nobel Prize should be 
given to more than one person  
c. scientific progress often requires the 
efforts of many people working together  
d. chance plays no role in scientific discoveries  
 
17. (2005-4) A biology class in Virginia conducted a 
survey of the plant species found on their school 
grounds. They found several plants that they didn’t 
recognize. What resources would be most helpful to 
the class in identifying the plants and determining if 
they were introduced as exotic species?   
a. Fossil records and historical society 
publications  
b. Virginia newspapers and science journals  
c. Virginia native plant checklists and plant 
identification keys  
d. Biology textbooks and the encyclopedia  
 
18. (2005-42) In 1869, DNA was discovered within the 
nuclei of cells. By the 1940s, scientists knew that 
chromosomes were made of both DNA and protein but 
did not know which was the genetic material of cells. In 
the 1950s, scientists demonstrated that DNA is the 
material responsible for heredity. In 1953, using 
information collected by other scientists, an American 
biologist and an English physicist built a three- 
dimensional model of DNA. These discoveries best 
illustrate the importance of —   
a. replication of results  
b. collaborative efforts among scientists  
c. recent improvements in the scientific method  
d. independent research  
 
 
 
19. (2005-1) What is the total magnification used to view 
these onion cells through this microscope setup?   
a. 50   
b. 400      c.   40      d.  10  
 
 
 
20. (2001-18) The picture shows a coverslip correctly being 
lowered onto a slide. This method is used because it —   
a. prevents the escape of microorganisms found in 
the water  
b. reduces the possibility of air bubbles on the 
slide  
c. prevents the coverslip from moving  
d. allows microorganisms to move freely in the 
water  
 
21. (2004-44) Early classification systems consisted of two 
kingdoms; Plantae and Animalia. What scientific 
development allowed taxonomists to establish the 
Monera and Protista kingdoms? 
a. Development of Koch’s postulates  
b. Creation of electrophoresis  
c. Discovery of DNA  
d. Invention of the electron microscope  
 
22. (2006-23) As part of their training, biologists learn the 
history of developments in their field of interest. Which 
best explains the importance of this education?   
a. It provides background information since most 
conclusions from before 1950 have been 
disproven.  
b. It gives biologists an understanding of their 
field so they can expand on earlier 
knowledge.  
c. It narrows their field of research because most 
important discoveries in biology have already 
been made.  
d. It allows scientists to rule out models that have 
already been tested.  
