 
  Name ____________      Date _________    
  
BIO SOL Review 15 - Genetics & Evolution (28)  
 
1. (2006-44) Albino individuals lack all pigmentation 
so that their hair and skin are white. This family 
tree shows that albinism —  
a. is carried only by females in this family  
b. is a recessive genetic trait  
c. is a sex-linked gene  
d. requires both parents to be albinos  
 
2. (2006-11) Which statement is best supported by 
the phylogenetic tree shown?  
a. Species W is still developing from a prior 
species.  
b. Species W first came into existence 10 
million years ago.  
c. Species V is still alive today and is the 
oldest species.  
d. Species X, Y, and Z became extinct 20 
million years ago.  
 
3. (2006-10) In squash plants, yellow fruit (Y) is 
dominant to white fruit (y). If two plants 
heterozygous for yellow fruit are crossed, what are 
the possible genotypes of the offspring?  
a. YY, Yy, yy only  
b. YY, yy only  
c. Yy only  
d. Yy, yy only  
 
4. (2006-6) Two plants are crossed, and the traits of 
height and color are assessed in the offspring. The 
following cross was conducted: TTPP x ttpp. 
Which of the following choices correctly describes 
the offspring?  
a. Three-quarters of the plants are tall and 
purple.  
b. All are tall and purple.  
c. Three-quarters of the plants are short and 
white.  
d. All are short and white.  
 
5. (2006-4) After a culture of cells is allowed to 
multiply and is viewed through a microscope, the 
cells are x-rayed with high-energy radiation for 
less than 1/100th of a second. After the radiation, 
many newly reproduced cells appear different. 
What has probably occurred?  
a. Contamination  
b. Mutation  
c. Bacterial infection  
d. Speciation  
 
6. (2001-32) In pea plants, tall plants are dominant to 
short plants. If two heterozygous tall plants are 
crossed, what percent of the offspring will probably 
be short?  
a. 75%  
b. 50%  
c. 25%  
d. 0%  
7. (2001-20) Which of the following is an example of 
a genetically engineered organism? (1 point)  
a. Seedless fruits resulting from grafting of 
one plant onto another  
b. A plant that received external DNA to 
produce natural insecticides  
c. A plant that naturally possesses medicinal 
properties  
d. A new plant variety created by cross-
pollination  
 
8. (2001-15) In 1910, Thomas Morgan discovered 
traits linked to sex chromosomes in the fruit fly. 
The Punnett square above shows the cross 
between red-eyed females and white-eyed males. 
Fruit flies usually have red eyes. If a female and 
male offspring from the cross shown above are 
allowed to mate, what would the offspring probably 
look like?  
a. 2 white-eyed females; 1 white-eyed male 
and 1 red-eyed male  
b. 2 red-eyed females; 1 red-eyed male, 1 
white-eyed male  
c. 2 red-eyed females; 2 white-eyed males  
d. 1 red-eyed female and 1 white-eyed 
female; 2 red-eyed males  
 
9. (2001-12) Wild cats such as cheetahs, lions, and 
tigers experience decreased genetic diversity as 
their populations decline and become fragmented 
due to habitat destruction. Decreased genetic 
diversity leads to populations with —  
a. increased birthrates  
b. disproportionate gender ratios  
c. increased immigration rates  
d. decreased disease resistance  
 
10. (2002-44) People who have been exposed to 
excessive radiation often experience mutations. If 
these mutations only occur in somatic (body) cells, 
these people may —  
a. experience an increased risk of cancer  
b. experience difficulties replicating RNA  
c. develop entirely new DNA sequences in 
all cells  
d. pass on these mutations to their offspring  
11. (2002-28) In cows, long hair is dominant to short 
hair. In a cow that is heterozygous for long hair, 
what percentage of the cells undergoing meiosis 
will carry the dominant allele?  
a. 25%  
b. 50%  
c. 75%  
d. 100%  
 
12. (2002-11) In rabbits, short fur (F) is dominant to 
long fur (f). According to the Punnett square, what 
is the chance of two heterozygous short-haired 
rabbits having offspring with short fur?  
a. One in four  
b. Three in four  
c. Two in four  
d. Four in four  
 
13. (2002-7) Which of the following statements 
describes the process of natural selection?  
a. Individuals survive that have inherited 
traits adapted to their environment.  
b. Farmers select animals with desirable 
variations for breeding.  
c. Populations sharing the same gene pool 
interbreed and create new species.  
d. New species are formed via genetic 
engineering.  
 
14. (2002-3) DNA that is derived from the DNA of two 
or more different species is called —  
a. recombinant DNA  
b. mitochondrial DNA  
c. plasmid  
d. chloroplast DNA  
 
15. (2003-31) Lamarck was an early scientist who 
studied the development of characteristics in 
organisms over time. Which of the following 
choices best describes his views on how 
organisms change over time?  
a. Theory of acquired characteristics  
b. Law of independent assortment  
c. Theory of relative fossil-dating  
d. Theory of artificial selection  
 
 
16. (2003-48) The above chart shows vertebrate 
embryo development. Which of these would be 
least related to the others?  
a. 1  
b. 2  
c. 3  
d. 4  
 
17. (2003-42) The Human Genome Project was begun 
in 1988 by scientists from 13 nations as a 
worldwide effort to understand the sequencing of 
all of the DNA in the human body. What is one 
potential scientific benefit of this research?  
a. It will create communication between 
research centers.  
b. It will help to explain human cultural 
differences.  
c. It helps to classify man most accurately in 
the animal kingdom.  
d. It will help find the genes responsible 
for many diseases  
 
 
18. (2003-13) In corn plants, green (G) is dominant to 
albino (g). According to the Punnett square, what 
is the chance of this heterozygous cross producing 
albino corn plants?  
a. Two in four  
b. Three in four  
c. Four in four  
d. One in four  
 
19. (2004-39) A genetic pedigree showing that only 
males are affected by a certain disorder is 
evidence of what type of inheritance?  
a. Dominant  
b. Sex-linked  
c. Recessive  
d. Passive  
 
20. (2004-42) One way to increase the number of 
organisms in an endangered species is to let the 
few remaining individuals of that species breed. 
However, this breeding may also lead to species 
extinction because inbreeding over a short period 
of time may —  
a. increase beneficial mutations  
b. produce a different species  
c. reduce genetic diversity  
d. increase fertility  
 
21. (2004-36) What conclusion can be drawn from the 
genetic information above?  
a. The white parent carried a dominant allele.  
b. All the black rabbits in the F2 generation 
are homozygous.  
c. All the white rabbits are heterozygous.  
d. All the F1 rabbits carried a recessive 
allele.  
 
22. (2005-48) The chances of developing cancer, 
diabetes, or sickle-cell anemia are higher if a 
family member also has the disorder because they 
are —  
a. passed through blood contact  
b. related to diet  
c. highly infectious  
d. genetically based  
 
23. (2005-2) External sources, such as radiation or 
chemicals, can cause mutations in genes or entire 
chromosomes. For a mutation to pass on to 
offspring, it must occur in a  
a. sex cell  
b. muscle cell  
c. bone cell  
d. brain cell  
 
 
24. (2005-31) The differences in the above 
characteristics of flower species most likely 
resulted from parasitism, which did not harm the 
host species  
a. adaptations in response to different 
selection pressures  
b. defensive mutations allowing concealment 
of species  
c. mutualism between different plant species  
 
25. (2005-30) Change in species is described as a 
process that usually occurs over long periods of 
time. Yet, even though antibiotics have only been 
widely used for fifty years, scientists recognize that 
overuse of antibiotics has led to antibiotic-resistant 
strains of bacteria. The reason this can occur in a 
relatively short span of time is that —  
a. there are many different types of bacteria  
b. bacteria reproduce rapidly  
c. travelers carry bacteria around the world  
d. bacteria are very small  
 
26. (2005-17) Over many generations, unrelated or 
distantly related species may come to resemble 
each other due to —  
a. similar environmental factors  
b. competition with each other  
c. homologous structural adaptations  
d. similar genetic mutations  
 
27. (2005-16) A student hypothesizes that thick leg 
muscles are an inherited trait in dogs. The student 
collects data on several dogs, and the data show 
that dogs that live outdoors have thicker leg 
muscles than dogs that live indoors. What should 
the student conclude?  
a. Inheritance alone may not account for 
thick leg muscles in dogs.  
b. Dogs that inherit thick leg muscles may 
not survive indoors  
c. Dogs with thick leg muscles may require 
more exercise than dogs with thin leg 
muscles.  
d. Inheritance of thick leg muscles may be 
associated with coat thickness in dogs.  
 
28. (2005-6) In snapdragons, the combined 
expression of both alleles for flower color 
produces a new phenotype that is pink. This 
illustrates incomplete dominance. The Punnett 
square above shows that both the white and red 
snapdragons are homozygous. Which of the 
following would be the correct product from a 
cross between two heterozygous pink 
snapdragons?  
a. 2 red, 2 white  
b. 2 red, 1 pink, 1 white  
c. 1 red, 2 pink, 1 white  
d. 1 red, 1 pink, 2 white  
 
 
